[Post] Palindrome Algorithms (#1)
colinthornton/blog: content/blog/palindrome-algorithms.md

---
title: Palindrome Algorithms in JavaScript
date: "2020-04-27T17:43:37+09:00"
description: 'Going over several ways of solving the classic "is this string a palindrome" algorithm'
---

## Defining the problem

> If you're not familiar, a palindrome is word or phrase that retains its spelling even when reversed, the quintessential example being "race car". Go ahead, confirm that it's a palindrome. You can flip it around however many times you like, the letters will always come in the same order - r-a-c-e-c-a-r.

Reviewer: > order - r-a-c-e-c-a-r

I'd opt for a colon instead of an em dash here as the hyphens between the letters look too similar to the em dash in front of them. Something like:

> order: r-a-c-e-c-a-r.

This is a stylistic concern, though, and up to you really.

> I'm not quite sure why, but as far as algorithm problems go, this one comes up quite often. One thing I do know is that depending on the language you code it in, there are many naive approaches that you could take, so it's good to keep the space and time complexity of your solution in mind (as with all algorithms).

Reviewer: > I'm not quite sure why, but as far as algorithm problems go, this one comes up quite often.

Feeds back into: What are you trying to do with this post? Help out people who might come across this sort of problem in a coding interview?

Reviewer: Instead of naive consider "overly simplistic" or "inefficient."

I'm going to go over several solutions in JavaScript. The function signature looks like this:

```javascript
/**
 * @param {string} str
 * @return {boolean}
 */
function isPalindrome(str) {}

> ```

Reviewer: Huh, cool! This shows my obvious lack of experience with JavaScript, but is the above standard notation for function signatures?

Author: It's JSDoc, which seems to be common. https://jsdoc.app/tags-param.html

Reviewer: Huh, cool. That's for edumacatin' me. Where did you come across this, if you remember?

Author: I think I saw it when looking at someone else's library, and ended up googling "@param javascript" or something like that. VS Code analyzes it so you get code autocompletion and some of the benefits of strong typing without actually having strong typing.

Here's a way to reverse it all in one line, chaining together some built-in string and array methods.

```javascript
const reversed = str.split("").reverse().join("");
```

In case you're unfamiliar, `split` is a string method that returns an array of strings generated by splitting the parent at each occurrence of the specified delimiter. `reverse` does what it says on the tin, it reverses the sorting of an array. Then `join` is the opposite of split, it turns an array of strings into a single string, connecting those array elements together with the specified delimiter. In our case, the delimiter is an empty string, so `str` will be turned into an array of single-character strings, reversed, then joined back together again.

Now that we have `reversed`, we can simply compare it to `str`, and we have our solution. If they're the same, it's a palindrome. Altogether, here's the solution.

```javascript
function isPalindrome(str) {
  const reversed = str.split("").reverse().join("");
  return str === reversed;
}
```

> One thing this solution really has going for it is readability. Two lines and you're done - does `str` equal itself `reversed`. It can't get much easier to understand than that. But, you may have noticed that I titled this section "a naive solution". So what gives?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One thing this solution really has going for it is readability. Two lines and you're done - does `str` equal itself `reversed`? It can't get much easier to understand than that. But, you may have noticed that I titled this section "a naive solution." So what gives?
```

The biggest issue with this approach is the amount of space it requires. When the function is called, the computer already has space carved out in memory to store `str`, and then it needs to carve out another equally large chunk of memory to store `reversed`. In the case of an input like "racecar" it's trivial, but imagine the input string were the text of any novel you picked up off the shelf. Chances are good that if you looked at the first letter of the first word of the book, then looked at the last letter of the last word, that they are not the same. There's no reason to even look at any of the other letters. But with this algorithm, we store a reversed copy of them all in memory, just in case! Let's see if we can't reduce our memory requirements.

## No copies

This time we're going to write `isPalindrome` without a `reversed` variable. It would be ideal if we could solve the problem only using the string that's been passed to us.

> I already hinted at the algorithm we're going to use in the paragraph above about the case of a very long input string. If you were to pick up a book and determine if its text were a palindrome, you'd start by looking at the first letter and comparing it to the last letter. If they were the same, you'd go to the second letter and compare it to the second-to-last letter, and so on... If you miraculously reached the end of the book without finding a mismatch, then congratulations, that novel's a palindrome (and you have a lot of time on your hands).

Reviewer: > and you have a lot of time on your hands

🤣

Let's try to emulate that approach in code. In order to loop through each character in the string, we're going to use a for loop, comparing the front index of `str` to the corresponding back index along the way. In the case that they aren't the same, we can immediately return false without wasting time checking the rest of the characters.

```javascript
for (let i = 0; i < str.length; i++) {
  const j = str.length - 1 - i; // i places from the back
  if (str[i] !== str[j]) {
    return false;
  }
}
```

This is already starting to look good. But you may have noticed that there is one small optimization that can be made. In the current implementation, once the loop passes the halfway-point, it starts to make the same comparisons over again, just with `i` and `j` swapped. In all, it ends up checking each character twice. So the optimization is to stop the loop once it has reached the midpoint of the string, because it's definitely a palindrome if the loop makes it there.

```javascript
for (let i = 0; i < str.length / 2; i++) {
  // same as above
}
```

> Now you might be thinking, "Divide the length by 2? But what if the length is _odd_?" That's a good question, the kind of questions you should be asking when solving these kinds of problems. Let's look at an example with the input "kayak", an oddly-lengthed word. In that case, the for loop will run as long as `i` is less than 2.5 (the length of "kayak" divided by 2).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you might be thinking, "Divide the length by 2? But what if the length is _odd_?" That's a good question, the kind of question you should be asking when solving these kinds of problems. Let's look at an example with the input "kayak," a word with an odd length of characters. In that case, the for loop will run as long as `i` is less than 2.5 (the length of "kayak" divided by 2).
```

Author: I killed this paragraph, didn't really know where I was going with it in the first place.
